---
title: "Erin Hassett"
description: "placeholder"
location: ["Australia"]
author: "Erin Hassett"
---

*From: Erin Hassett, Wattle Gum Library, Australia*

**Tell us a little about your background.**

I make my home in Clarence Valley, NSW, Australia with my husband, ten children, aged thirty to ten, and two daughters-in-law, though only five of our children now live at home. We live on a rural property with cattle and chickens, with the children driving 4WD’s and dune buggies and swimming in the dam. Our children have always been home educated, and we have graduated six thus far.

**What are your earliest memories of books and reading? Was there a particular book or event that really made you a reader?**

I don’t recall a time when I couldn’t read, entering school already able to read. I read all the time, the backs of the cereal boxes, outside on top of the water tank, at night by the light of the street light. At school I’d have a book open in my desk and sneak my desklid up constantly. One of my fondest primary school memories is the year I broke both my wrists simultaneously. For those weeks whenever the rest of my class wrote, with both my wrists in casts, I was able to openly read.

**How/why did you start collecting books?**

My Mum homeschooled my younger siblings in the 80s, a homeschooling pioneer in Australia. She amassed an extensive collection via Lifeline book sales. When she finished homeschooling, she passed the entire collection onto me. Nine 6-foot bookcases and many trailer loads later, I had begun my own collection. I kept most of those books, many of which were my childhood books. And I’ve continued to add to the collection since, via Rotary book sales, op-shop and garage sale finds. We are literally surrounded by thousands of books throughout our home.

**How or where did you first hear about the concept of a private lending library?**

I wanted to be a librarian as a child and would issue the neighbourhood children with library cards, stamping our family books in and out of circulation. When first married, we lived in a small country town that had a private lending library in the main street. The idea always intrigued me.

Fast forward decades and I became a member of a Facebook group, Reshelving Alexandria, where [Sandy Hall from America would often share about her lending library](https://www.highlandscc.com/halls-living-library/). I was most intrigued but dismissed the idea as “only possible in America.” Then [Catherine McKay from the Hunter Valley, NSW, Australia](https://www.livingbookhouse.com/) launched her library, and I was inspired. With encouragement from Catherine, I decided to leap in.

**How did you start lending?**

Our library consists of wall to wall, 9-foot bookcases built by my husband and late father. They continue around the entire room. The center is comprised of large, deep picture book bins on caster wheels. Once I decided to open our library I didn’t wait until my library was perfectly set up but just began, planning on evolving as and where needed.
Nearly two decades previously I had entered all my books into Readerware, a cataloguing database, and had continued to add new books as they came into our home. In prepration for opening Wattle Gum Library, we imported all those books over to Library Thing. I then spent days tidying up and adding tags.

For decades I had been purchasing rolls of PVC plastic book covering and sticky tape, from the same supplier that my local library bought from. Whilst not all my books were covered, I decided to cover the remainder as they left or were returned. At this stage my library was organised into genre, so we rolled forward with that layout. I created a new page on my website outlining all the details of Wattle Gum Library, shared these in our local homeschool facebook group and emailed my local homeschool email list.

Wattle Gum Library was officially launched.

**What resources have you used to learn how to build and share a library?**

I’ve leant heavily on learning and support from the collective wisdom and experience of members of the [facebook group, League of Lending Librarians](https://www.facebook.com/groups/221535058512623). I’ve watched the videos in their files of members and enjoyed podcasts about fellow librarians at >[**Plumfield and Paideia**](https://plumfieldmoms.com).

**How do you balance library work and family responsibilities? Is your whole family involved?**

As a homeschool mum, coordinator of our homeschool group, long-term book collector, owner and creator of Wattle Gum Books and Wattle Gum Homeschool, a lending library was a natural and seamless progression. The children assist within the library according to their interest. My ten-year-old loves to scan books into the database, my 22-year-old enjoys covering the books. The boys, 12, 15 & 17, assist with moving furniture or piles of books around the room.
When families come to borrow, the children are happy to socialise with or entertain the children. The real challenge is me, when I’m enthused with a new idea to implement I have to flex my self-discipline muscles to ensure we complete our homeschool lessons and needed home management tasks before I dive into my latest library project.

**How do you run your library? Do you have regular days or hours?**

Returning books and books on hold can be brought to and collected from homeschool events. Until recently I have been open a few afternoons a week, though as I live out of town, everyone contacts me before coming out. However, in a bid to attract more patrons I have now switched my afternoon openings to fortnightly on Tuesday and Wednesdays. On the Tuesdays I host workshops around Nurturing a Love of Literature, and on Wednesdays I host Story Hour.

**Do you charge a fee?**

I do. I opened with one fee and then promptly halved the membership in a bid to attract more patrons. I needed to factor in that I live in a low socio-economic rural area. I have previously allowed a few people to borrow books without membership for various reasons. Due to being recently “burnt,” these types of arrangements have now ceased. Going forth I will also require patrons to sign a contract.

**How do you catalog and organize?**

I use [Library Thing](https://www.librarything.com/) and its borrowing interface Tiny Cat. Kristi Stansfield from Maryland Living Books has been wonderfully generous and patient in teaching me how to use both catalogues. I have over 7,000 of my 10,000+ books uploaded and use tags prolifically.

When I launched my library, I opened with living books organised by genre on the shelves. I have since changed the layout, and the fiction is now organised by the author’s surname, though the picture books are organised by genre in their bins. I’m still debating what best suits me there. One day I’d love to add labels to the spines. I’m sure I’ll be forever dreaming of new ways to improve our library.

**What is your philosophy on collecting?**

I pick up most of my books for free or for little at book sales and op-shops, so I often bring home piles of good books. I then decide if the books are worthy of space on my shelves. I either keep the book, donate to friends/patrons, or if it’s a double of a quality book I store in my shipping container for my future grandbabies.

**How do you decide what a good book is?**

I grew up in a home surrounded with decent books. When a young parent, I discovered Charlotte Mason, and my desire for quality living books was ignited. I’ve spent hundreds of hours poring over “books about books” and other excellent booklists. I have developed a “sixth sense” of what makes a good book. I’m looking for books that are rich in language, engaging, and inspiring. I particularly have a passion for Australian History and picture books.

**What advice would you give to those considering starting their own library?**

Just dive right in. Your library will be a constant, evolving project. If you wait until your library is “perfect” you may never start.