---
author: "Sara Masarik"
title: "Using UV Lights in Our Library"
description: "placeholder"
tags: ["Book Care"]
---

Our library is in the basement. [Last summer, we did a major overhaul](/ask-the-librarian/1)—ripping out old flooring, resolving some window issues, and doing everything we could to make the space cleaner and safer. But at the end of the day, a basement is still a basement. And so, we started looking for practical ways to prevent a mold outbreak.
After a lot of reading and research, we discovered that an inexpensive UV light can be surprisingly effective at stopping mold spore growth. It turns out, it’s also helpful in preventing other microbial activity on our books. A nice bonus: the small amount of ozone the unit produces seems to freshen the air—and the books—just a bit.
Now, a very important note: in high concentrations, ozone is absolutely dangerous. That’s why we only run the UV light for about 10 to 15 minutes at a time. In our setup, that doesn’t produce a harmful level of ozone, especially with how quickly we air out the space afterwards. From what I’ve read and studied, that timing and ventilation make it a safe option for us—but *everyone* should assess their own setup carefully. Our basement has a good exit path for airflow, and that likely helps a great deal.
We use the UV light periodically during cold and flu season and more often during wet and damp periods of time, when the environment is more prone to mold. This solution may not work for everyone, but for us, it’s made a real difference. We now use the UV light weekly, alongside running dehumidifiers, and we’ve seen a noticeable improvement in keeping mold away from our beloved collection. It also gives us peace of mind that we’re possibly neutralizing anything the books may have picked up while visiting patrons’ homes. While we can’t claim scientific proof, it feels like a very affordable way to do a whole lot of good.

- [UV Light Bulbs](https://amzn.to/3QqgfWE)
- [Ozone Generator](https://amzn.to/4k3dkAY)
- [Dehumidifier](https://amzn.to/3CZmM7N)
