---
# TODO: fix Part 1 link
title: "Where do I find affordable living books to add to my library?"
author: "Sherry Early"
description: "placeholder"
tags: ["Book Acquisitions"]
---
Whether you have 100 or 1,000 books, your library is big enough to share with someone. If God is calling you to open a lending library, He will provide the books and other resources to make your library of value to others. These are just a few possible ways that it may happen.

First, read [Part 1 of this two-part series: How do I begin to acquire more books for my library?](/) Then, read [this article at Biblioguides: Thrift Store Shopping Without Leaving Your House by Deanna Knoll.](https://www.biblioguides.com/pub/article/thrift-store-shopping-without-leaving-your-house.html) In this article, Deanna tells you everything you need to know about shopping online for books. You may be able to grow your library without ever going anywhere.

However, there is a thrill that comes with hunting books “in the wild.” And even for people who think they live in what’s often called a book desert, there are still books, and book bargains, to be found. Here are some of the places to look:

- **New bookstores.** Yes, regular bookstores, even new bookstores like Barnes and Noble, can have bargains for you to snatch up. I like to visit new bookstores just to write down titles of books that I want to read or look for, even if I can’t afford the new book prices. And bookstores, like all other stores, have sales and bargain shelves, so check those out while you’re browsing. Just take your sales resistance with you, and plan to check out brand new books more thoroughly before you buy.

- **Used bookstores.** Used bookstores can be found in almost every town or community. Some are better than others. Always check the free book cart in front of the store or the bargain shelves in the back. Three chains worth checking out are Half-Price Books, McKay’s, and Mr. K’s Used Books. [Biblioguides has a bookstore finder and list of recommended used bookstores.](https://www.biblioguides.com/bookstores/) And you can always do a location search as you pass through any town to find hole-in-the-wall bookstores that might just have the treasures you want.

- **Antique stores/malls/shopping centers.** The advantage to shopping for books in an antique store is that these places will usually only carry old books. The disadvantage is that they may think old means “worth a lot of money.” Or they may not know much about books, and you may find a bargain. You never know until you try.

- **Thrift stores**. Goodwill, St. Vincent de Paul, Deseret Industries (DI), Salvation Army, Disabled American Vets (DAV), [Habitat for Humanity ReStore.](https://www.habitat.org/restores) These are the biggest chains, but there are also hundreds of other, locally operated thrift stores. And almost all of them receive and sell book donations. Prices and selection vary wildly from store to store. That why it’s called hunting books “in the wild.”

- **Little Free Libraries.** I always keep a small stack of books in the car that are giveaways just in case I come across a little free library. That way I can take a book, if I find a good one, and I can leave a book in return. The Little Free Library organization provides a [Little Free Library World Map](https://littlefreelibrary.org/map/) to help you find little free libraries wherever you are. However, many little free libraries are not registered with the parent organization, so also keep your eyes peeled for any signs that say "free books!"

- **Book donations**. If you build it, they will come. If you tell people you have a library or you’re planning to open a library, or even that you just love books, you are likely to get offers for book donations. I suggest that you tell these generous people that you will take whatever they want to donate with stipulations: You will use whatever books fit into your library plan and selection policy (what you want), and the rest of the books will be sold or donated. Unless you have a 501c3 designation as a charitable organization, the donor cannot take a tax write-off for his book donation. You might also tell the potential donor what kinds of books you are looking for and what kinds you are not, so that she doesn’t go to the trouble of lugging her nineteen boxes of romance novels to your library just to find out that you have no use for them. You are also free (and wise) to disallow any damp, moldy, or bug-infested books into your home or library space. Nevertheless, book donations can be a great way to grow your library.

- **Library bookstores and book sales.** Most public libraries nowadays have a small bookstore or a shelf of books for sale or a book corner or something. And many still hold annual or semi-annual book sales.[ Book Sale Finder](https://www.booksalefinder.com/) will lead you to more library book sales than you can possibly visit, and just stopping in to a library that you see in your travels is likely to produce results, too.

- **School closings.** Unfortunately, many private schools end up having to close down because of declining enrollments or increasing costs or both. If you see notices about a private school near you that is closing for whatever reason, be sure to call or write an email and ask whether they have a library and what is going to happen to the books. I purchased over 1,000 books from a Catholic school that was closing in my area, and they asked me to pay only whatever I could afford as a donation to the sponsoring church. Many private schools, especially private Christian schools, have excellent libraries, full of the best old books. You could hit a goldmine if you are just willing to ask.

Don’t get in a hurry to grow your library. Try some of the above techniques and places for finding good books, and add the books, a few at a time, to your library for the benefit of your own family and the families of your library patrons or future patrons. Just be patient and diligent as God gives the increase.
